---
layout: default
title: Releases
---

The latest release of ScalaSTM is version 0.6.  To get it you can
* follow "sbt instructions":#sbt or "maven2 instructions":#maven
* download a prebuilt JAR
** for 2.10.0-RC5: ["scala-stm_2.10.0-RC5-0.6.jar":https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/releases/org/scala-stm/scala-stm_2.10.0-RC5/0.6/scala-stm_2.10.0-RC5-0.6.jar]
** for 2.9.2: ["scala-stm_2.9.2-0.6.jar":https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/releases/org/scala-stm/scala-stm_2.9.2/0.6/scala-stm_2.9.2-0.6.jar]
** for 2.8.2: ["scala-stm_2.8.2-0.6.jar":https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/releases/org/scala-stm/scala-stm_2.8.2/0.6/scala-stm_2.8.2-0.6.jar]

h2(#notes). Release notes

Changes between 0.5 and 0.6:
* @retry@ and @retryFor@ added to the Java compatibility interface.
* uses of @scala.actor.threadpool.TimeUnit@ in the interface replaced with @java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit@ to avoid making ScalaSTM depend on the separate @scala-actors.jar@ in Scala 2.10.

Changes between 0.4 and 0.5

* @scala.concurrent.stm.japi.STM@ added, which makes it much cleaner to access ScalaSTM functionality from Java.

Changes between 0.3 and 0.4
* @CommitBarrier@ added, which allows multiple atomic blocks (each on its own thread) to commit together.
* Small performance improvements.
* STMBench7 benchmark support added.
* Automatic selection of STMImpl in most cases.

Changes between 0.2 and 0.3
* Support for Scala 2.9.0.
* Timeouts for @retry@.  See ["Waiting : Timeouts":modular_blocking.html#timeouts].
* Bug fixes and contention management improvements
** ["#11":https://github.com/nbronson/scala-stm/issues/closed#issue/11] -- fix for two-@Ref@ form of @compareAndSet@;
** ["#12":https://github.com/nbronson/scala-stm/issues/closed#issue/12] -- rare @StackOverflowException@ under heavy contention and true nesting;
** ["#13":https://github.com/nbronson/scala-stm/issues/closed#issue/13] -- contention management improvements;
** ["#14":https://github.com/nbronson/scala-stm/issues/closed#issue/14] -- fix for external decision support;
** ["#15":https://github.com/nbronson/scala-stm/issues/closed#issue/15] -- NPE if a post-decision handler threw an exception;
** ["#18":https://github.com/nbronson/scala-stm/issues/closed#issue/18] -- atomicity can be broken by @TMap@ copy-on-write mechanism; and
** ["#19":https://github.com/nbronson/scala-stm/issues/closed#issue/19] -- potential deadlock between pessimistic readers.

Changes between 0.1 and 0.2
* Substantial performance improvements, especially for nested atomic blocks.  Nested atomic blocks without @orAtomic@ are optimistically subsumed (run directly in their parent transaction), then retried without subsumption if partial rollback is needed.
* @TSet.View@ and @TMap.View@ are integrated into the Scala collection class hierarchy, with factory companion objects and @Builder@ and @CanBuildFrom@ instances.
* A fix for @whileCommitting@ handlers (issue ["#3":https://github.com/nbronson/scala-stm/issues/closed#issue/3]).
* @TxnLocal@ can now be read and written from while-preparing and while-committing handlers.  Combining @TxnLocal@ and life-cycle handlers is now more concise.
* Transaction statistics can be enabled for the default algorithm with the VM argument @-Dccstm.stats=1@ (for more information see the ScalaDoc for @scala.concurrent.stm.ccstm.CCSTM@).

h2(#sbt). SBT

Tell @sbt@ about a dependency on ScalaSTM by adding a library dependency to your @build.sbt@ file (or a Scala build file)

{% highlight scala %}
libraryDependencies += ("org.scala-stm" %% "scala-stm" % "0.6")
{% endhighlight %}

@sbt update@ will then download the correct @scala-stm@ JAR and use it for building.

h2(#maven). Maven2

Separate artifacts are published for each version of Scala, so the desired Scala version (such as 2.9.2) must be included in the @artifactId@ for Maven (@sbt@ automatically handles this). The ScalaSTM dependency for your @pom.xml@ is

{% highlight xml %}
<dependencies>
  <dependency>
    <groupId>org.scala-stm</groupId>
    <artifactId>scala-stm_2.9.2</artifactId>
    <version>0.6</version>
  </dependency>
</dependencies>
{% endhighlight %}

The deployment tests inside the ScalaSTM source include a complete ["pom.xml":https://github.com/nbronson/scala-stm/blob/master/dep_tests/maven/pom.xml], including the repository configuration for @oss.sonatype.org@.

h2(#previous). Previous releases

Version 0.4
* Manual download: ["scala-stm_2.9.1-0.4.jar":http://scala-tools.org/repo-releases/org/scala-tools/scala-stm_2.9.1/0.4/scala-stm_2.9.1-0.4.jar]
* ScalaDoc: "0.4":api/0.4/index.html

Version 0.3
* Manual download: ["scala-stm_2.9.1-0.3.jar":http://scala-tools.org/repo-releases/org/scala-tools/scala-stm_2.9.1/0.3/scala-stm_2.9.1-0.3.jar]
* ScalaDoc: "0.3":api/0.3/index.html

Version 0.2
* Manual download: ["scala-stm_2.8.1-0.2.jar":http://scala-tools.org/repo-releases/org/scala-tools/scala-stm_2.8.1/0.2/scala-stm_2.8.1-0.2.jar]
* ScalaDoc: "0.2":api/0.2/index.html

Version 0.1
* Manual download: ["scala-stm_2.8.1-0.1.jar":http://scala-tools.org/repo-releases/org/scala-tools/scala-stm_2.8.1/0.1/scala-stm_2.8.1-0.1.jar]
* ScalaDoc: "0.1":api/0.1/index.html

