---
layout: default
title: Snapshot releases
---

Changes between 0.6 and 0.7-SNAPSHOT:

* added @transformAndExtract@, which allows an arbitrary value to be returned from the transformation function through to the caller.
* added @transformAndGet@ and @getAndTransform@ to @Ref@ and @TxnLocal@, previously these were only defined for @Ref.View@

Snapshot releases deployed to the @oss.sonatype.org@ repository are fully tested and functional, but may have changing APIs.

h2(#link). Links

* Manual download: ["scala-stm_2.10.0-RC1-0.7-SNAPSHOT.jar":https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots/org/scala-tools/scala-stm_2.10.0-RC1/0.7-SNAPSHOT/scala-stm_2.10.0-RC1-0.7-SNAPSHOT.jar]
* Manual download: ["scala-stm_2.9.2-0.7-SNAPSHOT.jar":https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots/org/scala-tools/scala-stm_2.9.2/0.7-SNAPSHOT/scala-stm_2.9.2-0.7-SNAPSHOT.jar]
* ScalaDoc: ["0.7-SNAPSHOT":api/0.7-SNAPSHOT/index.html#scala.concurrent.stm.package]

h2(#sbt). SBT

Tell @sbt@ about a dependency on ScalaSTM by adding a library dependency to your @build.sbt@ file (or a Scala build file). You will also need to add a resolver that can find the @oss.sonatype.org@ snapshot repository.

{% highlight scala %}
libraryDependencies += ("org.scala-tools" %% "scala-stm" % "0.7-SNAPSHOT")

resolvers += ("releases" at
    "http://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/releases")

resolvers += ("snapshots" at
    "http://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots")
{% endhighlight %}

@sbt update@ will download the latest @scala-stm@ snapshot JAR and make it available for building.

h2(#maven). Maven2

The ScalaSTM snapshot dependency for your @pom.xml@ is

{% highlight xml %}
<dependencies>
  <dependency>
    <groupId>org.scala-tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>scala-stm_2.9.2</artifactId>
    <version>0.7-SNAPSHOT</version>
  </dependency>
</dependencies>
{% endhighlight %}

Make sure you have the @oss.sonatype.org@ snapshot repository available

{% highlight xml %}
<repositories>
  <repository>
    <id>oss.sonatype.org.snapshots</id>
    <name>OSS Sonatype Snapshot Repository</name>
    <url>http://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots</url>
    <snapshots/>
  </repository>
</repositories>
{% endhighlight %}

